---
content_type: page
title: Syllabus
uid: cc570b3e-f782-a6d7-8b23-7606d226468d
---

Course Meeting Times
--------------------

Lectures: 1 session / week, 2 hours / session

Prerequisites
-------------

There are no formal prerequisites, but some knowledge of genetics, biochemistry and cell biology is expected. Ideally, candidates have successfully taken at least one of the following classes:

[_7.03 Genetics_](/courses/7-03-genetics-fall-2004/)

_7.05 General Biochemistry_

[_7.06 Cell Biology_](/courses/7-06-cell-biology-spring-2007/)

[_7.28 Molecular Biology_](/courses/7-28-molecular-biology-spring-2005/)

Course Description
------------------

All living cells possess a machinery for peptide synthesis, secretion, and posttranslational modifications. An enormous structural and functional diversity of peptides is generated by use of this cellular machinery. Peptides are broadly used as signal molecules for intercellular communication in prokaryotes, plants, fungi, and animals. Peptide signals in animals include vast numbers of peptide hormones, growth factors and neuropeptides. Some of the best known examples are enkephalins (which help us sense pain), somatotropin (which helps us grow), and insulin and glucagon (both of which regulate our blood glucose levels). Similarly in plants, peptide signals such as CLAVATA3 play important roles in development. Peptides are also used by living organisms as components of their host defense systems.

What determines the functional specificity of each peptide? How do these small polymers of amino acids survive hostile protein-digesting enzymes? How are they able to communicate with their specific peptide receptors or interacting proteins for proper function? In this course, we will learn about molecular bases of peptide signaling.

In addition, peptides potentially can be used as potent broad-spectrum antibiotics and hence might define novel therapeutic agents. For example, antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) are low molecular weight proteins with broad spectrum antimicrobial activity against bacteria, viruses, and fungi and are found among all classes of life. The ability of these natural molecules to kill multidrug-resistant microorganisms has gained them considerable attention and clinical interest, since multidrug-resistant microorganisms have developed resistance to multiple antimicrobial agents and are difficult to treat with available antibiotics. One of the most notorious examples is MRSA, deadly strains of methicillin-resistant _Staphylococcus aureus_. Infections with these pathogenic bacteria are untreatable with known antibiotics like gentamicin, streptomycin and kanamycin. Some antimicrobial peptides can kill methicillin-resistant _S. aureus_ strains, making them promising future drugs.

In this class, we will discuss AMPs, their biological functions, mechanisms of action, and applicability as therapeutic agents. Students will learn about various human defense peptides, such as defensins, and about plant peptides involved in symbiosis, such as nodule-specific cysteine-rich peptides. We will consider techniques to detect, quantify and modify peptides. We will also discuss experimental methods such as high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) and liquid chromatography coupled with mass spectroscopy (LC-MS) used for quantification of small molecules such as peptides. We will focus on the primary research literature, and students will learn how to read and critique research papers. Additionally, we will visit Cubist Pharmaceuticals, a pharmaceutical company based in Lexington, MA, which is developing peptides as drugs for various pathological conditions, such as complicated urinary tract infections.

Format
------

The course meets weekly for 2 hours. For each class, students must read two research papers assigned by the instructor. The instructor will spend the last 15 minutes of every class introducing the next week's topic. Students are encouraged to contact the instructor with questions or concerns about any aspect of the papers before each class. To facilitate discussion, students must submit three questions related to the papers to the instructor prior to each class. Questions can be about background, methods, data or overall interpretation of the paper. Active participation in class discussion is a must for this course. Students also need to complete one written and one oral assignment.

Course Objectives
-----------------

The goals of this course are:

1.  Learn how to read and critique the primary research literature.
2.  Understand the field of signaling and antimicrobial peptides and how knowledge about these peptides can contribute to new drugs.
3.  Understand experimental techniques commonly utilized to study antimicrobial and signaling peptides.
4.  Understand how to apply techniques learned in class to answer various biological questions.

Grading
-------

This course will be graded Pass / Fail. To pass this course, it is essential to read the papers, email three questions to the instructor prior to each session, actively participate in the class discussions, and satisfactorily complete the assignments.

Calendar
--------

| WEEK # | TOPICS | KEY DATES |
| --- | --- | --- |
| 1 | Introduction of Instructor and Students and Course Overview | &nbsp; |
| 2 | Antimicrobial Peptides in Innate Immune Defense and Their Production | &nbsp; |
| 3 | Antimicrobial Peptides as Double Agents | &nbsp; |
| 4 | Folding Matters for Antimicrobial Peptides | &nbsp; |
| 5 | Techniques to Study Antimicrobial Peptides | &nbsp; |
| 6 | Peptides in Biotic Interactions | &nbsp; |
| 7 | Peptide Transporters in Various Organisms | &nbsp; |
| 8 | Peptide Signals in the Brain | &nbsp; |
| 9 | Molecules of Hunger and Love | Written Assignment due |
| 10 | Epidermal Growth Factors (EGFs) as Signaling Peptides | &nbsp; |
| 11 | Molecules in Action: Antimicrobial Peptides as Drugs | &nbsp; |
| 12 | Field Trip to [Cubist Pharmaceuticals](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cubist_Pharmaceuticals), a subsidiary of [Merck Pharmaceuticals](http://www.merck.com/index.html) | Field trip to [Cubist Pharmaceuticals](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cubist_Pharmaceuticals), Lexington, MA |
| 13 | Signaling Peptides as Potential Drugs for Treating Cancers | &nbsp; |
| 14 | Signaling Peptides in Signal Transduction | &nbsp; |
| 15 | Last Day of the Class: Oral Presentations, General Discussion of the Course, and Course Evaluations | Oral Presentations due